
# Companies and User Data

## Types of data companies collect

There are four types of data that companies collect:

1. **Personal data**: is the data that can be used to identify a person, such as their social security number, or the IP addresses tied to that user's devices.
2. **Engagement data**: lets companies understand how customers interact with content like social media. 
3. **Behavioral data**: focuses on consumers' behaviors. This can include things like transactional detail such as purchase history. 
4. **Attitudinal data**: tracks the consumer's opinion about their experience; this includes experience surveys.

There are five ways that companies use customer data. They are: 

1. optimizing the customer experience; 
2. using information for product development; 

	Companies can use data to gain a better understanding of their users. The data gives companies a better idea about user preferences and dislikes, which allows companies to modify products, goods, and services to better align with user preferences.

3. reselling the data to data brokers, partners, or other 3rd parties; 

	A data broker is an entity that collects information about users, creates profiles based on characteristics, and sells the information to other companies. Data brokers sell these customer profiles. Customer profiles are users grouped by common characteristics. Data brokers can gather a lot of information including, but not limited to, Social Security numbers, financial history, demographic information, and more. 
	
	*Example*: A data broker could compile diabetics profile; this profile could have been created based on users searching for "insulin" online, purchasing diabetic snacks, or joining diabetic support groups. This diabetics profile is then sold to a health insurance company. With this profile, insurance companies may increase premiums for customers in this profile.

4. targeted advertising;  

	The big tech advertising machine makes hundreds of billions of dollars in profit annually. Social media companies and large search engine companies offer a lot of free services. However, even though users do not explicitly buy services from these platforms, companies still make money off of users. These companies sell advertising spots to advertisers and other third-party companies. Ad spots are informed and personalized by data that platforms and potentially data brokers have collected about users. 

5. improving their overall business strategy.

	Finally, businesses also use data to improve their overall business strategy. By tracking users' online footprints, they can better understand users' spending habits, competitor platforms, and preferences. This helps identify areas to invest more or less in.



# Privacy Laws - When Things Go Wrong

When privacy controls fail, users may be the target of targeted selling, have their personal information stolen, their identity stolen, and experience pricing discrimination. These are all very real consequences that happen every day as the result of insufficient privacy controls.

In a recent study, 14,250 users were surveyed about their overall technology usage and privacy concerns. The more an individual used digital services, the more they were concerned about privacy; there is a direct correlation between tech dependency and privacy concerns. This is called the privacy paradox. Even though users know and are concerned by about their privacy, they are too dependent on digital services to stop usage completely.

## Penalties for violating privacy policies

There are three primary penalties for violating privacy laws.

1. **Financial damages.** This amount could be a percentage of the company's earnings or a specific dollar amount. 
2. **Business ban.** Companies can be blocked from doing business in a particular country. 
3. **Miscellaneous category.** This usually occurs when there isn't a sufficient privacy law or a company has not sufficiently modified its original behavior. These penalties vary significantly and can include financial penalties, mandate the creation of a privacy program, jail time, and more.

Let's look at some real privacy laws to better understand real world penalties. Here we have three privacy laws: 

1. **General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)**: GDPR is perhaps the most well-known privacy law. It is meant to protect and empower EU citizens to have control over their user data. Companies who violate this law can be fined up to 10 million euros or 4% of the company's worldwide revenue, whichever is higher. In relation to GDPR, Luxembourg's National Commission for Data Protection (CNPD) first filed a complaint against Amazon in 2018. In 2021, Amazon was issued an $888M fine for using data for advertising without sufficient consent. 
2. **California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA)**. CCPA is a US state-based privacy law meant to regulate for-profit entities conducting business in California that use California consumer data. There is no cap on fines. Companies are fined per violation; $2500 - $7500 per violation. In relation to CCPA, Sephora, Inc failed to notify customers that their data was being sold and was issued a $1.2M fine. 
3. **Personal Information Protection Law of the People's Republic of China (PIPL)**. PIPL is a China based privacy law meant to protect Chinese citizens. The fines can go up to $7.8 million or up to 5% of the company's business revenue. In relation to PIPL, Didi international was found to have violated 16 different privacy and security rules and, as a result, was ordered to pay $1.2B.

Each of these laws has a specific jurisdiction. While jurisdiction's often refer to geographical territories, sometimes they can also refer to citizens within a geographic territory who fall within the purview of the law.



# Privacy Laws

It's become increasingly important that individuals have legal privacy protections. Companies cannot be entrusted to self-regulate. There needs to be some type standardized rules, law, and/or framework that establishes best practices and specific rules for companies to adhere to. This sentiment is echoed by lawmakers across the globe who have begun creating more privacy legislation.

There are a five common themes amongst privacy laws. These themes show up in numerous privacy laws. 

1. **Data sovereignty**; data must be stored within specified areas and will be subject to the laws of the country where the data is stored. 
2. **Data Breach notifications**, which refers to a company's obligation to issue notice to users impacted by a data breach. 
3. **User data requests**; Users should have the right to request to have their data modified or deleted. 
4. **Increased transparency**; companies need to be more transparent about how they are using data. 
5. **Accountability**; a particular department, entity, or individual must be responsible for privacy.

## Components of Privacy law (jAsper)

Most privacy laws can roughly be broken into seven different components. I remember them by using "jAsper". 

"J" refers to **jurisdiction**. The territory that the law applies to. 
"A" stands for **author** and **aim**. Author is the entity that created the law, and aim is the purpose of the law. 
"S" stands for the **scope**, which defines what types of data this rule applies to. 
"P" stands for **penalty** and refers to the repercussion of violating privacy laws. 
"E" stands for **enforcement** and refers to the entity that enforces the privacy rules. 
"R" stands for **requirements** that a business must follow to maintain compliance.

*Example*: Let's apply the template to the Healthcare Insurance Portability Accountability Act (HIPAA). HIPAA is a US-based law created to protect patients receiving medical treatment in the USA:

- HIPAA's jurisdiction is in the USA. 
- Congress created the Act in the 1996, and 
- its purpose was to protect sensitive patient healthcare information (PHI) and prevent unauthorized disclosure of that data. 
- The scope is organizations that store, process, or transfer PHI. 
- The penalty for violating HIPAA can include either civil or criminal penalties depending on severity. 
- The Office of Civil Rights (OCR) enforces HIPAA. 
- Finally, HIPAA is subdivided into five rules, each has different purpose and requirements that companies must follow.

## Privacy law challenges

Privacy regulation has a few challenges. Regulating technology is a moving target. In general, technology out paces the writing and creation of new legislation. Good privacy regulation is a balancing act - generic enough to encompass any potential new technological advances but not so generic that it cannot give prescriptive guidance to address the risk. Another challenge is that often governmental bodies are tasked with writing privacy legislation geared towards regulating tech but may not necessarily be subject matter experts in those areas. Finally, there is a lack of global standardization, enforcement, and nation state coalitions. This causes a lack of standardization across the globe, making it increasingly hard for global companies to comply with different regulations in different countries.




# Bleeding Edge Privacy Topics

## Shifting left

In the traditional software development lifecycle, privacy and security controls and processes are added in the latter stage of the lifecycle. From a privacy lens, shifting left means implementing privacy controls at the beginning of the software development lifecycle, rather than towards the end. The Privacy by Design framework encourages shifting left.

## Bleeding edge

Bleeding edge refers to cutting-edge technology. I like to think about it as "shiny and sharp". New technology can increase innovation and improve processes and outcomes. However, new technology presents its own challenges, such as a lack of developed best practices and lack of experts who can implement the technology. An example of bleeding edge technology would be Ironman's or Ironheart's suits. The suits are revolutionary and can make the world a better place, but there isn't exactly a manual on how to use them and there are severe consequences if the suits are misconfigured.

## Bleeding edge challenges

Technology is always changing. Bleeding edge technology presents several challenges. First, new technology may introduce new risk that can't be addressed by pre-existing privacy and security controls. In order to adapt new, bleeding edge technology, companies may have to create and implement new controls to sufficiently protect themselves and their users. Secondly, there is always a lag between regulation and technology. New technology may not have a clear path towards compliance.

## Bleeding edge technology - public cloud

The public cloud is over a decade old ,but is still considered bleeding edge. Public cloud refers to infrastructure on demand from third-party cloud service providers (CSP). The CSPs manage the underlying infrastructure that powers various computing, storage, and cloud-native services. Traditionally, companies purchased physical hardware such servers and networking equipment to run their data centers. Now, companies purchase usage of those services from cloud service providers. The three main Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) are Google Cloud Platform (GCP), Amazon Web Services (AWS), and Azure.

## Public cloud benefits and challenges

Public cloud has several benefits. These include: enabling companies to buy and scale resources to meet their usage demands, decreasing their overall hardware investment costs, and increasing their rate of innovation. Pubic cloud platforms have unique challenges. New security and privacy controls need to be built to protect data residing on the cloud. Also, personnel need to be trained how to protect and secure cloud environments.

## Bleeding edge technology - blockchain

Blockchain refers to a shared ledger that records transactions and tracks assets in distributed data business network. If we break it down further, "blocks" refer to data groupings; each block can hold a specified amount of data. Each block has a specific capacity, and once the block is full, it is then chained to the previous block creating a blockchain. There are many blockchain based technologies such as cryptocurrencies and the next wave of the internet (web3 and web5).

## Blockchain benefits and challenges

Blockchain has a few unique benefits. By default, all blockchain transactions are immutable; the transaction records cannot be altered. Blockchain systems also increase transparency; users are able to view all previous transactions. Finally blockchain, has a unique security posture - encryption and distributed systems are built into the technology. However, blockchain faces few privacy challenges. Since blockchain records are immutable, users cannot request that their data be deleted. Additionally, privacy laws and best practice guidance hasn't caught up to block chain technology. This makes it harder for block chain based technology to be in compliance with existing laws.